Okay.
Oh well good morning. Thank you so much for having us.
We're really happy to be here
to talk about something we're really
proud of that we've done.
So, I'm Stephanie Rip. You've met me before.
I'm one of our Deputy Director generals
and I just want to introduce Richard Maloney, who's one
of our principal scientists,
and Tim Bamford, who's our director
of Terrestrial Biodiversity.
So you comfortable, we thought we might talk
for about 15 minutes and then leave
space for questions. Does that
Yes. Perfect. That'd be great.
Thank you.
Alright, so I'm not, I'm not gonna say too much.
I'm gonna leave it to the experts to talk about this stuff.
But just to recap, um,
so we've talked about this a few times
before, so if we just talk to the next slide.
So, um, one of the things that we wanted to build was, uh,
basically to develop the recipe of what would it take
to get all of the species and ecosystems to be thriving.
Um, and so that's the work that the team have done.
So really over many decades
and longer, there's been a whole lot of knowledge of
what it takes, the, the tools, the research, the skills,
and we've looked across everything today.
What would, what would it look like if you did all of that?
And therefore how do we make the best choices of what we,
um, can afford to do today?
And if we got more investment, what more would we do?
And it helps you pick the next best thing
that you might work on depending on, um,
the criteria that you might have.
And it helped us think about the fact, if you look across,
we were quite good at going, here's what we need
to do in French water and marine and predators.
We were good at prioritizing within the line,
but it's how do you actually look across all of that
to get the balance across everything?
'cause you can't just do one thing. Mm-hmm.
You've gotta make sure you get a good balance.
So we could get to predator Free 2050,
which would be phenomenal,
but that's not gonna help the marine environment
necessarily, or the freshwater environment.
So we've gotta get that, that balance across.
And so the team will take you into the tool.
It's an interactive tool, but we've just done screenshots
'cause it's just easier than, um,
trying to play with technology.
Yeah. So, um, yeah, so instead of having that issue
by issue investment, we are trying to make sure
that we've got that prioritized investment
across everything we are doing.
That we are really clear
that we've got good return on the investment.
We know the impact we're having in terms
of the outcomes we're trying to achieve for biodiversity.
That it's really transparent
and clear why we are investing in different things.
Um, and we understand the trade trade-offs
that we are making across the
different work that we are doing.
Um, and in the past we've often talked about
how many hectares of an activity
that we do that's important.
We wanna know how much of an activity, but just
because you've done x hectares of weed control doesn't mean
that you've reached the right biodiversity
outcome that you might wanna reach.
So we are making sure we've built a system that
for each activity we know what outcome it actually leads to
and what we're actually doing
to save the things that we wanna save.
So that's just a bit of a recap,
but I'm gonna hand to the team, um, to get into the detail.
Right. So, um, where we started was think like all
of our work, as Steph said,
has predominantly been within a particular area like birds,
or was it for example.
So where we started was thinking about
how do we group up our biodiversity work
so we can think across Lt Aurora,
what are we achieving in terms of the species
of the ecosystems?
And then also cut that spatially
and understand in new Plymouth, what are we achieving,
what are we achieving, um, on, for example.
And so we created a program structure for biodiversity
to help us jump up
and down those different levels in decision making.
And so we took like an interventionist approach.
So the basic level and at really granular, we look
after species at a really kind of narrow level.
And then we pull up and we look after ecosystems
and then we pull back even more
and we manage threats across a larger landscape area.
Um, and then also we have a bunch of questions like,
for example, a Kiwi population may be declining
and we dunno why that is.
And so we need to answer why is that declining?
So we need to undertake research
to understand particular questions.
And then often once we know something is declining
or something is happening, we may not have the tools, um,
to manage or improve that particular thing.
Um, so for example, um,
before we developed aerial control for, um, for rats
and possums for example.
And so we need to undertake some research to develop tools.
So we thought the, the main four groups
of delivery work we do is looking after species, looking
after ecosystems, looking after threats,
and undertaking a bunch of research.
So we created those four program groups you see.
And then in addition, um, as a department we have a bunch
of obligations like our rams are sites, obligations
with councils and some treaty settlements
and other obligations that cut across all of,
um, those four areas.
But we do them because they're obligations predominantly.
Um, so we pulled that out as a separate program group.
Um, and then we have a support program group.
'cause we have things like providing guidance to data,
et cetera that we need to do in the background to be clear
that we're doing as a department,
but kind of sits outside of those areas.
Um, and so we created those six program groups
and we looked at all of the biodiversity across al row
and created the 33 programs that you can see within them
that defines all of the biodiversity work, um,
that we need and would like to do.
Um, and you can go to the next slide.
Um, and so then what we've done is
for each program we've created a clear narrative which
explains what's the objective of looking
after threatened species, what's in
and out of scope, what's the criteria for undertaking that,
um, for prioritizing those activities.
So for example, um, in the threatened species program,
there's four and a half thousand threatened species.
You generally wanna prioritize the ones that are closest to,
um, being irreversibly lost.
Um, but you also want to think about things about
what is the difference in looking into the undertaking those
actions to look after that threatened
species compared to doing nothing.
But also what's the probability of, um, being successful
and are you duplicating it?
Are you already looking after those species or ecosystems?
So what does, um, choosing to do something, how does
that add to the overarching picture?
Um, whether there are treaty settlements
that create commitments
to those particular species, et cetera.
So all of that sits in the background in terms of,
um, these criteria.
Um, and then we've created, you can go to the, um,
next slide to one more please.
Um, we've created individual outcome plans,
so basically recipes for each species, um,
that sit in the background
that help us understand if we do want to, um, look
after the southern on rocky aura, what do we need to do?
So it's saying there are three main sites,
two on rocky aura, um, that you really need
to be managing the impacts of, um, presentation, um, on the,
the birds, um, and the eggs.
And then also, um, on the mainland of the south island, um,
there's some recreation, like four wheel driving
that has impacts, um, on the birds.
So you need to be managing that too,
so you can quickly cost it up
and understand if we do those actions, you'll be looking
after, um, looking after the southern doctoral.
And so a few jump back aside, um,
we have over 14,000 of those outcome plans sitting within,
um, those 33 programs.
So there's a heap of choices. That's a lot.
Um, going back to Steph's point
before, like this is really about informing decisions.
So what's information is enabling us to do is have really
transparent conversations about what do we want to achieve.
It's unrealistic where even gonna do the budget
that we need, we can't do everything.
So we need to be really informed and clear about what,
and there are why we want to choose to do.
But this is now enabling us to inform discussions
and also provide advice through really understanding like
what are the outcomes that we wanna achieve
for a particular place, for a particular species
or ecosystem and for Aldi.
Um, and understand what are the costs of that
and what does a different set of options enable you to do.
So if you, um, now go two slides along, please.
Um, so we're just gonna run you through a few of the tools
that we've, um, created based on this information.
Um, that's enabling us, um, to have these conversations.
And so, um, we've put all of these outcome plans,
they go onto the computer and then we, um, visualize them.
So you can now look across, um, a range of different aspects
and kind of understand what are our choices.
And so for example, this is showing, um, all
of the potential threatened species plans that need trapping
to control creditors.
Um, what you can see down the middle there is that tells you
what are the pressures or the pests that we're really trying
to manage and look after 'em.
So you can see, um, at the top there, you know,
possum stokes and mats, rice Matts mindset. What, what do
The numbers represent?
Um, wh which numbers, what the numbers
Represent. 2,971
was that, that that's
The number of activities, the number of places that
that work needs to occur around the country.
So if it's 2,900, that's 2,900 sites where we want to do,
Uh, possum. You want to
do possum control.
If we were doing all of the possum control possible
to protect all threatened species in this
Case, that's, that's the, you could have that
how many species it was affecting as well.
Could you? Yeah. So if you look, um, down the,
on the bottom left, it shows oh,
okay, species that would benefit.
And in the live version, if you wave your mouse over it,
it tells you how many species and you can click through
and it will tell you, um, give you more detail, et cetera.
So if, um, that's great. Go to the next slide please.
Um, just giving you a little example.
So the, um, potential work to look
after representative ecosystems in like ka kaki.
And so again, similarly you can see the pressures,
the activities that you'd be undertaking,
and then it gives you an example of, um, some
of the spatial capabilities of the tool.
So what that enables us to start having conversations
with our treaty partner, externals third parties about
what is the work that they're doing?
We are doing, how do we really dovetail our efforts in a way
that we haven't before?
And also start to understand if we're already choosing
to do X amount of work.
Actually if we're doing a bunch of ecosystem work,
it's already ticking off a bunch of the actions
that could be doing to look after a threatened species.
And so, um, if we add one
or two additional activities such as, um, some more, uh,
predator control or maybe some, um, work
around the breeding season, then that could, um,
provide assistance for that particular species.
So it's just helping us have chats about our best bank buck
away that we haven't before.
And then you can really start to drill down.
So if you go to the next slide, um, this, um,
previous slide, you can then click on the pressure
and go, Hey, woody weeds there in a issue.
Um, what does that mean for hoki?
And so, um, again, showing you, um, a little bit of work.
And then if you go to the next slide, um,
you can also search from what is the pressures
or, um, the particular
activities that you want to undertake.
And so, um, this focus on go management.
So, um, as you'll be aware, goats like
to level up a bunch of biodiversity.
Um, so just understanding halfway what is the scale
of wow, the goat pressure.
Um, and then on the live version
I'll take care of it, Um, on the plans,
you can then click on the plan status, the work
that the department's currently committed to, um,
and then what the work is set its next cab
off the rank, et cetera.
So again, um, it's just enabling us
to have informed conversations at various levels in a way
that we haven't before.
If you jump slide please.
So that's, um, like investigating
and using this information at quite a granular level
and it's the leadership team.
And with our, so we've been starting
to have conversations about like what is the water balance
of effort across those six program
groups that we talked about.
So we've created a different tool,
which we call the budget explorer tool that we're using
to start to explore and have some of those conversations.
So the current investment scenario, um, which we're using
as a department to base our biodiversity efforts, uh,
that we spread our efforts across program levels,
but where there's a choice, we focus on a reversible loss.
And so an example of that is you're choosing
to spend money on three species, you should then be looking
to focus the budget
that you're gonna spend on threatened species.
The ones that are closer to extinct rather than the ones
that whilst still threatened, um,
aren't declining at the same rate.
But I think what they'll also show you is while we are
having a focus on, um, irreversible loss,
you've still gotta do your, you know,
your landscape scale control of so many other things.
'cause you don't want everything else catching up
and then getting in that category.
So it's like the health system, you've gotta have layers
of different intervention points as well.
Okay. Yeah.
Um, so the budget Explorer tool, um, it's quite cool.
On the left hand side you have the program groups
and then the programs within it, and then you can run along
and basically pull a slider bar across
and buy your outcomes, which is your species
or your ecosystem threats
that you're managing in particular places.
Um, and then it draws down, um, the departments
direct allocatable budgets.
So just kind ignore these costs. They're not accurate.
But just to give you an idea.
So if you, um, flip through two slides I think,
Um, so then what that enables us to do is once you've gone
through, um, you can then compare different options.
And so, um, for example, option one on the left hand side
of here is a general reflection of, um,
what the department is currently buying.
If you were to say, Hey, let's move, let's shift our budget
more towards things that are more urgent, um,
whilst still having that spread, what would that look like?
Um, and then you can start to see essentially if you,
you know, dial down on some of your obligations, some
of your knowledge gaps and some of your support,
that enables you to buy more direct management
so you can have a conversation about what does that look
Like. So is it, so it
doesn't make decisions for you as a kind
of tool, a black box doing that job.
It's just providing information for the senior managers
to explore kind of what those options look like
and then they can make more informed choices about the trade
offs they need to do within any budget.
So for our current budgets,
and that way we can have a really, um, kind
of in common story that we tell about
what we are focusing on, what we can afford to do
with the resources we have at the moment,
and be more confident that we're working on things that are,
um, the highest priority that align with, uh,
expectations in the direction that we want to take.
Or it also helps when we partner with other funders
who might be like the next foundation
or others where they're funding a bunch of work
that changes the picture of what, you know, that balance for
what we are funding and, and how you amplify the
outcomes you're getting with that partnership.
Mm. And then this is another example of
how you can jump, um, into that level of detail
to also understand what those trade.
Brilliant Question.
Um, and so this is just our last slide.
So step, um, about historically all of, um,
our reporting with the treasury
and in our annual reports have been based on
our areas treated.
Um, so how many areas have we done for predator control?
How many he weeds, how many hectares?
And so, um, this for 25, 26, we've actually moved to these,
uh, top four measures,
which is reporting on the threatened species, the number
of ecosystems that we're looking after instead.
So we're now reporting on the outcomes
that we're achieving rather than the outputs.
Um, and over time we'll be turning more off
of these outcome based measures on as we get the report.
Yeah. And we still know the activity of course as well,
but it just helps us tell a better story
of the difference we're making.
Yeah. So we can still tell you how many, um,
hectares we've treated for a particular thing,
but it's just not the reporting measure.
'cause as Steve said, it could drive perverse incentives
where you are ing a place given, um,
the cost per hectare rather than the number of species
or ecosystems that are inside it.
And of course it means that when we,
when we do do an action on the ground, we go
and kill the piece, do some obligations work
or whatever, we can report on all
of those different outcomes that we're actually getting for
that, for a species or an ecosystem
or for obligations work or whatever that is.
So we get line of sight now
between the work we do on the ground with, um, you know,
in the evidence trail that follows that right
through into the outcomes that we seek that match up
with the strategy the department's
following overall for that.
So, so it's a nice way for us to join those things together
and relate them so that our story is kind
of complete from end to end.
So kind of part of what that enables us to do.
Brilliant. Well thank you very much for that overview.
It's, uh, fascinating and well done for all your work on it.
That's pretty comprehensive and progressive, so thank you.
But look, we've got a flurry
of questions we will start with Rachel.
Yeah, thank you. I can see why you're eager to talk
to us about it, so thank you for that.
I've just got two very little questions.
Um, one is the accessibility of the site, who gets to use it
and if it is just doctor you work
with like universities and everyone like that.
That's one question. And then the second question is, uh,
you were talking at one point, Tim, about the, um, the, uh,
species that are threatened now and some focus and um,
and then Steve, you were talking about the, um,
the landscape scale and looking up.
So I was wondering in terms of climate change
and changes to habitat with that, how
that fits in with Yeah.
With all of this work. Great.
Do you wanna just, uh, talk to
who we've been working with and I'm happy to
Cover off the client. Thank you too.
Yeah, so at the moment as we build all of the elements
of the tool and provide all of the information out,
the reporting side and so on,
it's mostly departmental staff there.
The intent is that's transparent, it's available for people
to use, you can explore it for yourself
and you see into what it looks like
so you can understand the difference between the decisions
that have been made versus how you might think about,
you know, budget allocation yourselves and,
and how that actually works across the board.
So, um, in terms of putting it out
to the wider New Zealand public, um, some
of the spatial information
around things like threatened species is a bit sensitive
around where that is.
Um, for things like people collecting lizards,
that was for example.
And so, um, so I think there's a step that we have to go
through first just to, um, understand
how we would actually achieve that.
But the intent is to get there and, uh, to do so.
So I think we are, um, we're a little way off that just yet.
Um, but um, we're definitely heading in
that direction to do that.
That's, that's the point really.
It's to make the information available
and to let everybody see how they can understand
what conservation work looks like, how they can fit in,
how they can help support and deliver stuff.
Um, no matter whether you're a community group or mm-hmm.
Um, or, uh, a business or anything like that.
Um, and, uh, come along
and include the work that's high priority
for us versus come along
and do the things you are interested in.
And here's where it fits into the kind
of wider pictures where we, where
We are going and councils are particularly interested too.
So we're gonna trial doing some work with them
because the more we start getting a bigger, um, picture, um,
across all land 10 years, there's a big opportunity
to think, um, the predator free, more urban
and rural environment, how you start thinking about that.
So there's, there's lots of scope
to think a bit broader just on your climate question.
So, um, climate is of course, um, a threat to a lot
of our species and ecosystems.
We've been working our way through, um, a whole lot of work.
We've assessed over a thousand species around risks to, um,
to from climate change
and what we might do to think about the adaptation.
We know pests might get
to different areas that they didn't before.
Um, and we are working our way through ecosystems as well.
So when they build the plans, that's factored in.
And so sometimes there's things, whether it's climate,
whether it's disease, we might not be able
to completely manage that thing.
So what else do we need to do?
We might need to do more predator control,
or where do we take other pressures off to,
to balance out the things we can and can't manage?
So that's one of the advantages is we haven't had that kind
of all threats, all outcomes view in one place.
And then of course, the flip side of that
that we're also working on is, um, our biodiversity is a,
is a major benefit in terms of, um,
how we're gonna adapt to climate change.
So we're just starting to think about some
of those the other side of the point as well.
Thank you. Thank you Grant.
Yeah, I'm just intrigued.
Um, yeah, how long have you been developing this tool
and how, how long has this, how long have you been going
with this, you know, stars?
Yeah, so I think that that's, uh, there's lots
of different answers to that, but, so conservation planning
and how that works has been a conversation
around the conservation community
globally for quite a long time.
Mm-hmm. So it's about 2005, 2006 we've been working around
what does prioritization look like.
The genesis of some of these tools come from work
that we've been doing in collaboration with the us uh,
federal government over official wildlife service work
for their endangered species act.
And so we've been, um, building tools collectively
with them understanding the problem
and then, um, bringing it back.
So both with the Australians
and the Americans, we've spent quite a bit
of time thinking about this problem and what it is.
It's fair to say, I think
that globally this is a world leading way
for us to think about work.
Yeah. Um, nobody at the level of a, a country
or a state has been putting together ecosystem species
threats, obligations,
and research work all in the same package to make
that transparent across the board and mm-hmm.
Uh, so as there's a lot
of excitement out there in the global community about that.
Yeah. Um, but we're still on a journey.
A it's not, this isn't a final product in its current sense.
It's, it's a start point for where we want
to be over the next five to 10 years
to really hone in what's actually looks, and
The specific projects been about 18 months,
but it's based off, it's about integrating
and using existing information
and approaches where you have in a different
way. So you can argue
It's yes. And just
one quick my mind.
Um, so, and, and today, if you seen, like,
if you come across as an example where you've seen,
we didn't understand that that's really,
you can certainly see where we can get a lot better outcome
because of the information you're getting and and,
and understand what you're going get.
That those sort of light bulb
things come through, that's what you found.
Yeah, very much so. Yeah.
It is about trade offs around, uh, how you get balance.
And so for this year, it is the conversation we're having
with the directors, uh, collectively in order to set what
that looks like for future impact measures overall for that.
So, um, and it's, it's not in the context
of starting fresh, is it?
It's, no, we, we start with the work
that we're currently doing and
our commitments to doing that.
And so it is about how we, um, understand where we want
to be in say, five years time.
Mm-hmm. And then how we understand what the, uh,
what the pros and cons of changing away from
or what our return on investment is against those various
kind of elements across the board.
I think also, I'll just add one thing.
There's other criteria you can,
you know, apply over the top.
So if you look at the investment
with the international visitor levy,
what a tourist coming here want to see,
they wanna see healthy forests, they wanna see, uh,
bird life, bird life and all that.
So we can use this overlay that it's about
what are those high priority tourist areas?
Where do we wanna invest
to make sure we get the best outcomes in those places
or in marine reserves or, or whatever else.
So, you know, you can sort of look into it
and pull out different answers depending on what answer,
you know, what question you're trying to answer.
Thank you. Um, Priyanka,
Thanks. Just
one quick comment and one question,
and thank you for sharing this.
Really interesting. Um, I too was interested in
who the users were, so I'm pleased to hear
that you are looking at what it would, uh,
what an interface could look like for public use,
because I'd have thought it's a good way to tell the story
of why conservation is important
and how specifically communities in particular areas can
contribute towards a common goal.
So great to hear that.
Um, does it, will it also, will this tool also, uh,
kind of collate existing spend by the pa?
You mentioned partners
before, there's already pockets of work happening
and funded by other players other than central government.
Yeah. So will that bring
that into the funding decisions mix?
Yeah, so I, I think, um, so at the moment this, the,
the stuff that we are describing is the work
that the department has an interest
in across the board for that.
That includes things like third party revenue
and others that are contributing in that space.
Uh, so IVL
or work with, um, some businesses like in New Zealand,
for example, regional councils.
Yeah. Uh, that's right. Yeah.
And, um, but yeah, so that's, I think that's the answer is
So you'd be able, so for us, if we were looking
and using this tool to make a, uh, you know,
budget bid decision or what, whatever around what to fund,
where we'd be able to see who else is funding stuff in
that space or towards that particular species protection,
Not at the moment in terms of their budgets
and how they allocate stuff for themselves.
So we haven't got that level of visibility yet.
But are you planning to,
So I think particularly with councils
and others, so for, so for wildlife,
we'll often have a stronger picture
because we tend to know, we know what,
say the Kiwi are doing, we'll know what others are doing.
Particularly for threatened species for um, ecosystems,
we'd often not always know if what's happening on their
land, but that's why we'd, um, we've been trying to,
you know, get it right for ourselves.
Um, but then there's a, a chance to go out a bit further.
Okay. Like ideally.
Um, and it is one
of the proposed actions in the next biodiversity
strategy implementation plan
that we do have a national picture.
So that's one of the things. Um,
and just on your first comment,
I totally agree about the ability to tell a stronger story.
One of the things I sometimes find hard
to articulate in this role is the scale of the tens
of thousands of things we have to do.
And you make choices within that,
and you wanna make the best choice of, um,
and the best place to get the best outcomes.
And so I think it just helps us tell the scale of the amount
of work we need to do, but we do make a difference in terms
of how we're able to make really good choices about the, um,
the interventions that putting in place.
Thank you. Look, we've got a few more
questions and we have almost time.
We'll go Joseph and then clia.
Thanks. Just, uh, two quick operational questions.
Um, I just done really interesting project.
Um, I just had a look on your website
and can't figure out how to log into it.
Uh, get well, how do you, how do you get access to it?
Not, Oh, so, um, currently
because we're building it internally, it's um, the tools
that we've showed you today aren't
available yet to the right.
So you need to, um, be sharing them on flight. Yeah. But
We sit down with interested parties and work through it.
So longer term we'll figure out, you know,
how do we wanna share it?
But we meet with people all the time, we go into the system
with them to talk about what
their interests are and that kind of stuff.
So we've still gotta figure out how we do that, um,
public interface and then how we protect some things
that are a bit sensitive for a number of reasons. Well,
Okay. So all these,
the second, just second part of this, just,
um, how, how are you, how are you looking, um, working
with these different organizations, um,
and mapping their information and vice versa?
Mm mm-hmm. Uh, for, you know, I'll just give one one example
of the Field Wapa Foundation.
Mm-hmm. Oh yeah. And they operate 500 predator traps and,
and five river attachments in the gla
you know, area, field land.
Um, and they do 40,000 hours of birdwatching a year,
which then they feed all that information back in.
Um, how does, how do things like that, you know,
NDDA doing stuff up
and the cables, et cetera, et cetera, how do you feed,
how do you feed this stuff back
into the system and vice versa?
So we actually get, empower those organizations, um, and,
and you know, so they can, and,
and make sure we mapping that data effectively. We,
Where we have a strong understanding, like for example
with the TY Foundation,
we have a management agreement with them.
We understand the activities that they're doing and trapping
and looking after and the mountains and others.
We, the recipes
or the outcome plans that we're talking about
before we have that captured in the system.
Um, and so that work is being done and it's been here.
Um, obviously the cost is low to the department
because it's been done by third parties.
Um, in some cases, um, as Richard noted
before, we don't have a complete understanding
of all the work that's going on across PCL
by stakeholders and others.
And so over time, that's something
that we'll be developing and putting in here.
'cause obviously it does, if others are keen to contribute
and do this, send their fundraising
and do doing other things,
it bumps up the prioritization list
'cause the cost of achieve outcome
a lot lower as well. Mm-hmm.
Which, thank, thank you.
Um, Celia, my question, my first question is,
building on Joseph's was the whole organization's Q2
regional councils and then citizen sites with iNaturalist
and trap NZI mean, it seemed,
and they're variably reliable I'm sure.
Um, but I hope that we would be able to have some layers
of those pictures fitting in.
Yeah, that's right. And so we, there's spatial layers
for work that's been done.
We can access those and put them over the top
of say the polygons
that you saw on the screen before for that.
But we're also talking directly with the councils and with
and NPI around, here's where we are going as the department
for what it looks like with the view of lining that up,
how they describe their own business
and how we can put those things together.
'cause that's the sort of sensible approach across all
of New Zealand is to have a more joined up way for us
to talk about our work collectively.
So, and I'm very interested in how we tell the story
and make it work with tourism for the regenerative tourism.
Not just where the IVL goes,
but what people actually do and see.
And my last question, 'cause I've got about 20, um,
but I will realize we have limited time
is outta those roughly four
and a half thousand threatened species.
Um, how many species plans have you got for those?
Have you got one for four
And a half Thousand? We
have got one for every threat,
So, so we do Awesome.
Uh, and so, uh, but a lot of the plans are built, um,
but we call 'em template based plans.
Yeah. So for the really low priority species
that are never gonna get funding at the moment, we,
we don't have any experts working on them.
We've taken the best available
information for something similar.
So you might have a be that you've
126 lizards, you don't have 126
Detailed 60 plans.
And then we've made that into the other 60,
But we've got time for one last
quick question from Simon Court. Oh, thank
You. Oh, look, I'm really
interested to see
that the ramsar wetlands are on the mm-hmm.
Uh, are, are, are on the list.
Um, I'm just interested in terms of making progress.
Uh, how challenging is it to make progress around achieving
checkers for those wetlands when you've got to deal
with regional councils, regional plans?
Obviously there's a lot of other land users, uh,
who have an interest, uh, uh, in those catchments,
like around Marino.
So, uh, what, what are some
of the challenges around achieving outcomes? Yeah,
So I think, um, well they're the same challenges we have
now and I guess, uh, what we're able
to do is actually come up
with an in common agreement about what the work looks like.
And, uh, our role in some of those cases will be advocacy
and other times it'll be direct action what we're doing.
And so the aim here is to have a, a a in common recipe,
if you like, about what we're trying
to achieve within say our site and be able to describe that
and fund it appropriately and then monitor it, evaluate it,
and report on it so that we can actually learn
from what we did across the board.
So given this hundreds of, um, say farmers who live
around a farm Marino as an example mm-hmm.
Uh, what workers is Doc doing to engage with them
to understand, uh, how to balance these uh, these objectives
between their need to farm and grow food
and docks need to, uh, find a way to,
to live up to these dreams? Our expectations?
I, so it's a really good question.
So, um, so we do a lot of work at place with, um, with man
or with councils, with landowners,
particularly if we are interested in rewetting wetlands,
how are we gonna do that with enabling productivity?
So we're also looking at some partnerships
through the next foundation
with some different universities.
'cause quite often there's technology
or engineering solutions you need to get the right outcomes.
We don't have a bunch of hydrologists and others.
There's others who will think of smart ways to do this.
And so we do a lot to partner with others on that.
And we are also internally pulling together a bit
of a clearer wetland action plan.
'cause we've also identified it as an area that we need
to get really clear on what are all the activities we need
to take, who do we need to work with and do it so at place.
We do a lot of work with others.
Um, but yeah, it is, it is a challenging space.
So we are sort of looking a bit more externally to
who else do we need to bring in to help us to do that. Well
I thank you very much.
We have met time.
You can see there's a lot of interest in it.
So, um, it's fascinating. Well done on all your work.
We'll look forward to hearing more
and uh, seeing how it all goes as well.
So thank you very much for that. Well
See you in December.
Yes, you will.